Colorectal cancer is the third most common and third leading cause of death among cancers in the United States. Patients diagnosed at the earliest stages of tumor development have greater than 90% chance of survival, however, less than half of individuals for whom screening is recommended receive appropriate screening. Structural exams like colonoscopies and sigmoidoscopies are expensive and relatively invasive, while stool-based diagnostics, though convenient and inexpensive, fail to detect precancerous lesions, called adenomas. 

Thus there is a need for improved diagnostic methods that are inexpensive, non-invasive, and capable of detecting both adenomas and cancer.

Here we demonstrate that a diagnostic model incorporating both fecal bacterial community profiling and fecal occult blood can significantly improve the detection of colonic lesions.

Using stool samples from 490 patients we developed a cross-validated random forest classification model for detecting colonic lesions based on the abundances of certain bacterial populations and the concentration of human globin as measured by a fecal immunochemical test (FIT). We compared this model to using FIT alone, one of the most accurate and widely used noninvasive methods for colorectal cancer screening. The random forest model significantly outperformed FIT, detecting 95% of cancers and 61.1% of adenomas compared to 75.0% and 15.7% for FIT. The model had significantly higher sensitivity for nonadvanced and advanced adenomas, as well as stage I, II, and III cancers. Of the colonic lesions missed by FIT, the model detected 80.0% of cancers and 53.9% of adenomas. This increase in sensitivity was accompanied by a relatively low specificity of 76.2%.

Our results show that analysis of the fecal microbial community can compliment existing noninvasive screening methods to improve detection of colonic lesion, especially at early stages of tumor development.

With a negative predictive value of 99.98%, our model could be used to accurately identify those patients for whom a colonoscopy is unnecessary, drastically reducing healthcare costs and complications due to invasive screening. By incorporating other biomarkers, like those used in multitarget stool DNA tests, we can further improve the accuracy of noninvasive tests leading to a decrease in the incidence and mortality of colorectal cancer.
